{"verdict": "allow", "rev": 44, "data": {"rev": 44, "xml": "
Photoband  Spec
  
Overview
A desktop app (Windows and macOS) that adds a caption band to a photo, Polaroid-style, so people and notes can be written under the image. Captions prefill from the photo's own metadata through user-defined token templates. The user edits the text freely in a live, exact preview and saves over the original or as a copy.
Goals
One photo at a time, fast: open, check the prefilled caption, tweak, save, next. Under 10 seconds per photo for a typical edit.
What you see is exactly what gets written, including font rendering and line breaks.
Archival-safe: photo pixels are never resampled or recompressed when the format allows it, and metadata survives the save.
Works on TIFF scans (8/16-bit, large files) as a first-class format, plus JPEG and PNG.
Non-goals (v1)
Automatic face detection or recognition. Names come only from existing face regions in metadata.
Retouching or color correction of the photo itself. The app only adds, crops away or repaints border and band pixels.
Fully unattended runs with no way to review. Batch mode always offers a review pass and a pre-flight report, even when the user skips them.
Cloud storage, accounts or sync.
Core workflow
The main loop is open, review, edit, save, next, with the preview always showing the final result.
Open. Choose a folder, one or more files, or drag files onto the window. The app lists supported images in a filmstrip, sorted by filename.
Prefill. For the selected photo, the app reads metadata, applies the active template's token formats, and shows the rendered result with the caption band. If the photo already carries caption text, the app reads that text instead and offers to replace it (see Existing text).
Edit. The user edits caption text directly, switches template, or adjusts font, size and spacing. The preview updates as they type.
Save. "Save copy" (default, Ctrl/Cmd+S) or "Overwrite original" (separate button, confirmation on first use per session). The copy goes to the destination set in settings.
Next. "Save & next" (Ctrl/Cmd+Enter) saves and moves to the next photo. Unsaved edits prompt before navigating away.
Per-photo edits are held in memory as a draft until saved, so the user can move back and forth between photos without losing work. Drafts are also autosaved to the app's data folder, so a crash does not lose them.
Batch mode
Batch mode captions a whole folder with one template and one set of save settings, and writes everything in one save. Reviewing each photo first is optional.
Open folder. Choose a folder, with an option to include subfolders. The batch list shows every supported file with its status.
Template. Pick a saved template, or create or edit one in place. "Save template" stores it for later batches and single-photo use.
Batch settings (a panel before the run, remembered between batches):
Save mode: save copies (with the destination settings from Saving) or overwrite originals (with backup on by default).
Which files: all, only selected, or only files with no caption yet.
Existing captions: case A (made by this app) re-caption or skip; case B rebuild band or skip; case C skip (default) or erase in place, copies only.
Per-photo drafts: use a photo's saved draft from single mode when one exists (default), or use the template for all.
Photos with warnings: include, or hold back for review (default).
Pre-flight. The app reads metadata and lays out every photo in the background. It shows a report: how many are ready, and a list of flagged photos with the reason, such as text overflow, missing glyph, no names found, low-confidence OCR, or blocked format (CMYK, multi-page).
Review (optional). Three choices: "Review all", "Review flagged only" or "Skip review". Review steps through each photo in the side-by-side view with Next and Previous. Any photo can be opened in the full editor; its edits become a per-photo override inside the batch. "Exclude" drops a photo from this batch.
Save all. One confirmation states the count and the mode, for example "Overwrite 148 originals (backups to _originals)". Files are written by 24 workers, each through the same verified temp-file save as a single photo. A progress bar shows done, failed and remaining counts.
During and after the run
One failed file never stops the batch. It is marked failed with its reason, and the run continues.
Before each write, the app checks that the source's size and modified time still match the pre-flight. If not, it skips that file as "changed during batch".
Cancel stops after the files in progress finish. Completed files stay written.
A batch journal in app data records each file's state. If the app closes mid-run, the next launch offers to resume.
When the run ends, a summary lists counts, failures and skipped files, with "Retry failed" and "Export report (CSV)".
For overwrite batches with backups, "Restore originals from this batch" puts every backed-up file back.
The batch view uses the same side-by-side preview, template editor, style controls and existing-text review as single-photo mode, so a batch is the same result as captioning each photo by hand with the same settings.
Platform and architecture
The app is a Python backend with a web UI shown in a native window through pywebview. It is packaged as a single app for each OS. This keeps the UI web-based and fast while allowing things a browser tab cannot do: write back to the original file path, open native file dialogs, read 16-bit TIFFs and run ExifTool.
Layer
Choice
Why
Window
pywebview (WebView2 on Windows, WKWebView on macOS)
Native window and file dialogs, no bundled Chromium, small download
Backend
Python 3.12, FastAPI on 127.0.0.1, random port and per-launch token
Same stack as photokin; the image and metadata libraries live here
Pixel I/O
tifffile + Pillow; numpy for compositing; OpenCV for band detection and inpainting
tifffile handles 16-bit, BigTIFF, tiled and compressed TIFF that Pillow alone mishandles
Metadata
ExifTool (bundled), driven through a persistent -stay_open process
Most reliable reader and writer for XMP structs, MWG regions and TIFF IFDs
UI
TypeScript + a small framework (Svelte or React), Vite build, served by the backend
Fast iteration; the whole UI is static files
Packaging
PyInstaller; Windows installer via Inno Setup; macOS .app, signed and notarized, universal2 or two builds
Double-click install, no Python needed
Fallback mode. Running photoband serve starts the backend and opens the default browser instead of a native window. It is used for development, and on Windows machines without the WebView2 runtime the app switches to it automatically with a one-line notice. v1 does not bundle the WebView2 bootstrapper. File dialogs then come from the backend's native dialog helper.
Security. The server binds only to 127.0.0.1. Every request must carry the per-launch token. It only reads and writes paths the user picked in a dialog or dropped onto the window, plus the configured copy destination.
Division of work
The UI owns layout and text rendering (see Rendering engine).
The backend owns file decoding, preview proxies, metadata reading, existing-text detection and OCR, final compositing and all writes. OCR uses Apple Vision (through pyobjc) on macOS and Windows.Media.Ocr (through winrt) on Windows, with bundled Tesseract as the fallback.
File format support
TIFF is edited directly and written back as TIFF. The source's bit depth, color mode, compression and ICC profile are kept. JPEG and PNG are also supported.
Input
Read
Write
Notes
TIFF RGB, 8 or 16-bit
Yes
Yes, same depth
Band colors are converted to the file's depth and ICC space
TIFF grayscale, 8 or 16-bit
Yes
Yes, same depth
Colored text or band is converted to gray; the style panel warns
TIFF with alpha
Yes
Yes
The band is opaque; alpha is extended with 100% opacity
TIFF CMYK
Preview only
No (v1)
Save is disabled, with a message explaining why
Multi-page TIFF
First page
Blocked by default
Saving would drop the other pages; allowed only with an explicit setting
BigTIFF, tiled, striped
Yes
Yes, as striped TIFF
Tiling is not preserved; noted in the save log
JPEG
Yes
Yes, quality 95 by default (setting)
Re-encoding is unavoidable; the app warns once
PNG
Yes
Yes
Lossless
HEIC, RAW, PSD
No
No
Out of scope
TIFF compression. The output uses the source's compression (none, LZW, Deflate/ZIP, PackBits). For JPEG-in-TIFF sources the app writes Deflate and notes this in the save log.
Resolution. Output keeps the source's XResolution, YResolution and ResolutionUnit. The DPI is used for print-size calculations (see Templates and styling).
EXIF orientation. If Orientation is not 1, the app rotates the pixels to upright before adding the band, because the band must sit at the visual bottom. It then writes Orientation = 1 and transforms face regions to match.
Large files. It must handle 600 MB, 16-bit, 12,000 px scans. The UI never receives full-resolution pixels; it works from a preview proxy (see Rendering engine).
Metadata extraction
The backend reads everything with one ExifTool call per photo (-j -struct -G1 -n). It then normalizes the result into a fixed field set that tokens draw from. Each field is read from the first source in priority order that has a value.
Field
Sources, in priority order
title
XMP-dc:Title  IPTC:ObjectName  XMP-photoshop:Headline  EXIF:XPTitle
caption
XMP-dc:Description  IPTC:Caption-Abstract  EXIF:ImageDescription  EXIF:XPComment
date
XMP-photoshop:DateCreated  EXIF:DateTimeOriginal  IPTC:DateCreated  XMP-xmp:CreateDate; partial dates (1952, 1952-06) are kept as partial
location
XMP-iptcCore:Location, City, State, Country (each also its own token)
keywords
XMP-dc:Subject, IPTC:Keywords, merged and deduplicated
creator
XMP-dc:Creator  IPTC:By-line  EXIF:Artist
file
filename, stem, folder name
faces
Face regions (below)
Face regions
Read MWG regions (XMP-mwg-rs:RegionList, where Type = Face and Name is set) and Microsoft Photo regions (XMP-MP:RegionInfo, PersonDisplayName).
MWG uses center-based normalized coordinates; MP uses top-left x, y, w, h. Both are converted to one internal box format.
If both sources name the same person with overlapping boxes (IoU > 0.5), keep one.
If there are no regions but XMP-iptcExt:PersonInImage exists, those names are used without positions. Left-to-right order is then unavailable, and the token panel says so.
Unnamed face regions are not listed as names, but they are counted ({faces.unnamed_count}) so a template can say "and 2 unidentified".
Regions are checked against AppliedToDimensions. If those differ from the actual pixel size by more than 1%, positions are still used for ordering but the photo is flagged "region dimensions mismatch".
Ordering and rows. Names are sorted left-to-right by box center x. With row grouping on, faces are clustered into rows by center y. Two faces share a row when their centers differ by less than 0.6  the median face height. Rows are ordered front (lowest in the frame) to back. This supports the genealogy convention "Front row, LR:  Back row, LR: ".
Token system and caption formats
Each template has one or more text blocks, for example Title, People and Notes. Each block has a format string made of literal text and tokens. The token parser is a small Python library shared with photokin in v1, so both tools resolve {date:yyyy-mm-dd} identically. The backend resolves format strings for the UI, which caches the result per photo and format.
Syntax
{token} inserts a value. {token:format} formats it. {token|option=value|option=value} sets options.
[ ... ] is an optional group. If any token inside it resolves empty, the whole group, including its literal text, is dropped. For example, [Taken {date:mmmm yyyy}][ in {city}].
A newline in the format string is a line break. **bold** and *italic* apply inline styling.
\{, \[ and \* are literal characters.
Unknown tokens are underlined red in the settings editor and render as nothing (never as raw braces) in captions.
Tokens
Token
Output
Options and formats
{title}, {caption}, {creator}
Field text
case = upper, lower or title; max=N truncates with 
{date}
Photo date
Formats yyyy yy mmmm mmm mm m dd d, or auto. Missing parts are dropped with their adjacent separators, so {date:d mmmm yyyy} on 1952-06 gives "June 1952"
{today}
Current date
Same formats as {date}
{names}
Names, left to right
sep (default ", "), last (default " and "), order = lr, rl or meta
{names:rows}
Row-grouped names
row_labels and row_sep (see below); falls back to {names} when there is one row
{names.count}, {faces.unnamed_count}
Numbers
none
{location}, {city}, {state}, {country}
Place text
{location} joins the non-empty parts with ", "
{keywords}
Keyword list
sep; exclude takes comma-separated prefixes, e.g. exclude="People,Scan"
{filename}, {stem}, {folder}
File info
none
row_labels is a list of labels separated by /, front to back. The default is row_labels="Front row, LR: / Middle row, LR: / Back row, LR: " with row_sep="; ". Because option values use | and / as separators, a literal one inside a value is written \| or \/.
Settings dialog: caption formats
For each block: a format field with autocomplete (typing { lists the tokens with descriptions) and a live sample rendered from the current photo's metadata.
A "Try on" dropdown picks any photo in the filmstrip to test against. A panel lists every raw metadata value the app found for that photo, so the user can see why a token came out empty.
Format strings are stored in the template, so different templates can use different formats.
How template text relates to the editor
When a photo is opened, each block starts as linked: its text is the resolved format string.
The first manual edit turns the block into custom, shown with an icon. Custom text is plain resolved text with inline bold and italic; it holds no tokens.
"Reset to template" turns a block back into linked.
Changing the template or a format string updates linked blocks right away. Custom blocks are left alone, with a notice offering to reset them.
In the editor, "Insert field" puts the current value of any token at the cursor as plain text.
Editor UI
The editor is one window with four regions. The center preview is the exact output, and every control changes it live.
Region
Contents
Toolbar (top)
Open folder/files, template picker, Save copy, Overwrite original, Save & next, Undo/Redo, Settings
Filmstrip (left)
Thumbnails with status badges: untouched, draft (unsaved edits), saved, error. Keyboard up and down arrows move between photos
Preview (center)
Always side by side: Before shows the file as it is now, including any existing caption; After shows the output rendered by the final renderer. Zoom and pan stay in sync across both panes. When the window is too narrow for wide photos, the panes stack Before above After. The same view is used in single-photo mode, batch review and existing-text replacement. Zoom: Fit, 100% of output pixels, and scroll-wheel zoom with pan. A size readout shows output pixel size and print size at the file's DPI
Inspector (right)
Tabs: Text (one editor per block), Style (per-block font and paragraph settings), Layout (borders, band, spacing), Metadata (read-only values found, with face list)
Text editing
Each block has a multi-line editor with bold and italic buttons (Ctrl/Cmd+B, Ctrl/Cmd+I), the linked/custom indicator and "Reset to template".
Clicking text in the preview focuses its block's editor. The native spell check of the webview is on.
"Show faces" overlays the face boxes with names and their left-to-right numbers on the preview, so the user can check the order before trusting {names}. The overlay is never saved.
An empty block takes no space, so there are no blank lines where a missing field would be.
Per-photo style overrides. Style and Layout changes apply to the current photo only, marked with a dot next to the changed control. Two buttons turn them into defaults: "Save as template" creates a new template, and "Update template" changes the active one.
Warnings, shown in a strip under the preview, never as modal dialogs:
Text overflows a fixed-height band.
A glyph is missing from the chosen font (for example  or Cyrillic); the fallback font is named.
Text is smaller than 6 pt at the file's DPI (unreadable when printed).
Metadata issues: region dimensions mismatch, no face regions, or names without positions.
Undo/redo covers text, style and layout changes for each photo, and is kept while the app is open.
Templates and styling
A template is a JSON document holding layout, band styling, text blocks with their format strings, and each block's text style. The app ships read-only built-in templates. Users duplicate a template to customize it.
Built-in templates
Template
Border (sides / top / bottom, % of photo width)
Text
Classic Polaroid
5.7 / 7.6 / 28 on white; proportions from the Polaroid 600 frame
Centered; handwriting-style font; Title then People
Bottom band
0 / 0 / auto on white
Left-aligned serif; Title, People, Notes
Archive label
2 / 2 / auto on white, hairline divider above the band
Small serif; People, Notes; footer with {stem} and {date} in small caps
Museum card
4 / 4 / auto on off-white (#F4F1EA)
Two columns: Title and People on the left, date and place on the right
Dark band
0 / 0 / auto on #111, white text
For screens and TV slideshows
"Auto" band height grows to fit the text, with a minimum set in Layout. The Polaroid template uses a fixed bottom and shrinks text to fit (see Layout).
Scale mode (per template)
Relative (default): every size is a fraction of the photo's width, so the template looks the same at any resolution.
Physical: sizes are in pt and mm, converted with the file's DPI, so text prints at the same physical size on a wallet-size print and an 8x10. If DPI is missing or 72, the app uses relative mode and shows a warning.
In both modes the inspector shows values in the user's chosen display unit (%, px, pt or mm).
Text style (per block)
Property
Values
Font
Bundled fonts (below) plus installed system fonts
Weight and italic
Whatever the font offers; synthetic bold and italic are off
Size
Any unit; minimum 4 pt at the file's DPI
Color
Picker with hex input; defaults come from the band style
Alignment
Left, center, right, justify
Line height
Multiplier, default 1.25
Letter spacing
5% to +30% of font size
Space before and after
Any unit
Case
As typed, UPPER, lower, Small caps (only when the font has real small caps)
Layout (per template)
Border width for top, left, right and bottom, independently. A lock keeps sides equal.
Border color and band color. They are separate but linked by default.
Band height: auto with a minimum, or fixed. For fixed, overflow can be "warn" or "shrink text to fit", with a floor of 60% of set size.
Band padding (top, bottom, left, right), and text area max width as a % of band width.
Vertical alignment of text in the band: top, middle, bottom.
Columns: one or two, with the column split as a % and each block assigned to a column.
Optional hairline divider between photo and band (width, color, inset). Optional thin keyline stroke around the photo.
Fonts. Photoband bundles 12 Google Fonts families, all under the SIL Open Font License, which allows bundling. The OFL text ships in the app's About  Licenses. Noto Serif and Noto Sans are bundled as fallback only, so a character missing from the chosen font still renders.
Role
Font
Scripts to confirm at build
Classic serif
EB Garamond
Latin Extended, Greek, Cyrillic
Readable serif
Source Serif 4
Latin Extended, Greek, Cyrillic
Book serif
Literata
Latin Extended, Greek, Cyrillic
Display serif
Playfair Display
Latin Extended, Cyrillic
Clean sans
Inter
Latin Extended, Greek, Cyrillic
Humanist sans
Source Sans 3
Latin Extended, Greek, Cyrillic
Typewriter
Special Elite
Latin
Typewriter, clean
Courier Prime
Latin Extended
Handwriting, casual
Caveat
Latin Extended, Cyrillic
Handwriting, neat print
Patrick Hand
Latin Extended
Handwriting, pen
Kalam
Latin Extended
Formal script
Great Vibes
Latin Extended, Cyrillic
The build script reads each family's Google Fonts metadata and fails if a listed script subset is missing, so the table cannot drift from what ships. Where a font lacks a script, the missing-glyph warning names the fallback font used.
More fonts. Settings  Fonts has two ways to add more:
"Add font file" imports any .ttf or .otf the user has.
"Browse Google Fonts" lists the full Google Fonts catalog with previews rendered in the caption band. The chosen family is downloaded into app data. This is the only feature that goes online, and only when the user opens it.
The backend also lists installed system fonts and serves every font file to the UI, so the preview and the output use the same font file. A template that names a missing font falls back to Source Serif 4 and says so.
Template management. The user can create, duplicate, rename, delete, set a default, and import or export templates as .json. Exported templates include format strings but no font files.
Rendering engine
One layout engine in the UI produces the text layer for both preview and output, so line breaks and positions cannot differ between them. The backend never renders text. It only fills solid borders and composites the UI's text layer onto the untouched photo pixels.
Layout pass (UI, TypeScript)
Resolve every block's text: linked blocks from the format string, custom blocks as edited.
Convert all sizes to output pixels using the scale mode, photo width and DPI.
Break lines with Canvas measureText at output font size, with the output font file loaded through FontFace. Break on spaces and hyphens; hyphenate only at existing soft hyphens; a word wider than the line is broken by character.
Compute auto band height, apply shrink-to-fit if set, and record every line's baseline position. For justified text, record each word's x position.
The result is a layout object: output dimensions, border rectangles, colors, and a list of positioned text runs. It is plain JSON and deterministic for a given input and font file.
Preview. The preview canvas draws the proxy image and the layout object scaled by proxyScale = proxyWidth / photoWidth. The same runs are drawn at the same relative positions, and line breaks come from the layout object, never recomputed at preview size. Target: under 16 ms per redraw, so typing stays smooth.
Final text layer. On save, the UI draws the text runs at output scale onto transparent canvases, one per text area. It sends them to the backend as PNG with the layout object. Areas larger than 8,192 px on a side are drawn in strips to stay under WebView canvas limits.
Compositing (backend)
Decode the full-resolution source, applying orientation rotation if needed.
Allocate the output array with the same dtype and channel count as the source.
Fill with the border and band colors. These colors are converted from sRGB into the file's ICC profile with LittleCMS, and scaled to 16-bit where needed.
Copy the original pixels in at their offset, byte for byte, with no resampling.
Alpha-composite the text layer in the file's encoded (gamma) space, which matches how the browser blended the preview. Text color is converted the same way as band color.
Preview proxy (backend). Decode, orient, convert to 8-bit sRGB, and resize to 2,560 px on the long edge. Cache as WebP in the app cache, keyed by path, size and modified time. The next and previous photos in the filmstrip are prepared in the background.
Why not render text in the backend. Rendering in the backend with Pillow or HarfBuzz would need a server round trip on every keystroke, and its text would not match the browser's preview exactly. Using the browser's text engine for both preview and output removes the mismatch.
Saving
Two buttons are always visible: Save copy and Overwrite original. Both write through a temp file and a verified atomic rename, so a failed save never damages the source.
Copy destination (Settings  Saving)
Setting
Options
Default
Location
Subfolder next to the original; a fixed folder (picked with a folder dialog); same folder as the original
Subfolder named captioned
File name
Token pattern using the caption tokens plus {template}
{stem}-captioned
If the name exists
Add -2, -3 ; overwrite; ask
Add -2, -3 
Output format
Same as source; TIFF; JPEG (quality setting); PNG
Same as source
Keep file dates
Copy the source's created and modified dates onto the output
Off
A "Save copy as" menu item opens a save dialog for a one-off location without changing the setting.
Overwrite original
Confirms on first use in each session, with "Don't ask again this session".
"Back up originals before overwriting" (default on) copies the untouched file to a _originals subfolder, or a chosen folder, before the first overwrite. Later overwrites of the same file keep the first backup.
If the file is locked by another app, as with Windows file locking, the save fails with a clear message and the draft is kept.
Metadata on output
Copy all metadata from the source with ExifTool (-tagsFromFile), including the ICC profile, IPTC, XMP and EXIF.
Update the pixel dimension tags (EXIF, XMP tiff and exif) and set Orientation = 1.
Remap face regions to the new canvas, so Lightroom, digiKam and photokin still see the faces in the right place. For each normalized box: x' = (offsetX + xW) / W', w' = wW / W', and the same for y and h. Then update AppliedToDimensions. This is done for both MWG and MP regions.
Remove any embedded EXIF thumbnail, which would otherwise show the photo without its band.
Write a photoband XMP record: app version, template JSON, layout object, per-block text, original pixel size, photo offset inside the canvas, and a hash of the original photo pixels.
The user's own title and caption fields are never changed. The rendered caption is never written into them, including XMP-dc:Description.
Re-caption. When a file with a photoband record is opened, the app offers "Edit existing caption". It crops back to the original pixels using the stored offset, checks the pixel hash, and restores the editor state. Saving then replaces the band instead of adding a second one. If the hash does not match (the file was edited elsewhere), or the record is missing, the app falls back to detecting the band and reading its text (see Existing text: detect, read and replace).
Save procedure
Back up if needed.
Composite into a temp file in the destination folder.
Apply metadata with ExifTool.
Verify: reopen, check dimensions, and for lossless formats check that the photo region matches the source's pixel hash.
fsync, then atomically replace with os.replace.
Update the filmstrip status, and append to the session save log (Help  Save log).
Existing text: detect, read and replace
When a photo already has caption text, the app finds it, shows what it says, and replaces it with new text. How exact this is depends on whether this app made the caption.
Case
How the app knows the text
How it removes it
Result
A. Captioned by this app (photoband record present, pixel hash matches)
Stored per-block text and layout
Crop back to the stored original pixels, then apply a new band
Exact and lossless; no OCR
B. Band present but no record (metadata stripped, or made by another tool)
OCR on the detected band
Rebuild the band, or erase the text in place (user chooses)
Near-exact; the user confirms the band edges and the text
C. Physical caption in a scan (handwriting on a real Polaroid or a printed border)
OCR, including handwriting
Erase in place with inpainting, on a copy by default
Best effort; the original writing is kept in the backup
D. Text printed over the photo itself
Detected and flagged only
Not removed in v1
Out of scope: erasing it would alter the photo
Detection pipeline (backend, runs on open)
Record check. If a photoband record exists and the pixel hash matches, use case A and stop. Otherwise, look for the hidden band marker (next section). If it is found, the exact photo edge comes from it, and the caption text too when the payload layer survived, with no detection or OCR needed.
Band detection. Scan inward from each edge on the proxy and look for rows and columns of low variance and near-constant color. The boundary where variance jumps marks the photo edge. Refine that edge at full resolution to the exact pixel. Output: photo rectangle, band rectangles, band color (median) and a confidence score.
Text finding. Inside the band rectangles, find text boxes by contrast against the band color. Group them into lines and blocks by position.
Recognition. Run OCR on each line. It uses the OS engine: Apple Vision on macOS (printed and handwritten text) and Windows.Media.Ocr on Windows. Tesseract, bundled, is the fallback. Each line keeps its text, box and confidence.
Style estimate. Estimate font size from the height of capital letters, alignment from the line positions, and text color from the darkest cluster. These prefill the Style tab as a starting point; the original font itself cannot be identified.
Review in the editor
A banner reads "Existing caption found" with its case and confidence. The preview outlines the detected photo edge and each text line.
The recognized text fills the editor as custom blocks, one per detected block, with low-confidence words underlined so the user can correct them. The user can also choose "Start from template" to use the metadata prefill instead.
The photo edge has drag handles, a 1-pixel nudge by arrow key and a 400% loupe, so the user can fix a wrong edge before anything is erased.
A "Show original" toggle (hold Space) also flips the After pane to the original, as a quick blink comparison alongside the side-by-side panes.
Replacement modes
Rebuild band (default for case B). Crop to the confirmed photo rectangle, then apply any template as for an uncaptioned photo. The result is clean, and the band size and style can change.
Erase in place (default for case C). Keep the original band and its paper texture. Build a text mask from the text boxes, grown by 2 px, and fill it. On a flat band the fill uses the band color; on textured paper it uses inpainting (OpenCV Telea). The new text is then drawn in the same area with the Style settings.
The user can brush-add or erase areas of the mask for stray marks the detector missed.
Safety rules
For case C, Overwrite original is disabled until the user turns it on in Settings. Handwriting on an original print is part of the historical record.
The recognized original text is stored in the photoband record (originalText, with its case and confidence), so the old caption can still be read after it is replaced.
After replacement, the file gets a normal photoband record, so the next edit is case A: exact and lossless.
Hidden band marker
The app hides a marker in the band's background pixels, so a captioned file still identifies itself after its metadata is stripped. Photo pixels and text pixels are never touched. It uses two layers: a small robust layer that survives JPEG re-saves, and a larger fragile layer that survives only lossless copies.
Layer
Carries
Size
Encoding
Survives
Marker (robust)
Magic ID, version, photo rectangle in normalized coordinates, band color, short hash of the photo pixels, payload length
32 bytes, with ReedSolomon error correction
2 levels on the average of 88 DCT mid-frequency pairs in cells scaled to band size, tiled at least 4 times across the band
JPEG re-save at quality 70 or higher, resizing down to 25%, cropping part of the band
Payload (fragile)
Compressed per-block text and the layout object, the same content as the photoband record except originalText
About 14 KB
Least significant bit of luminance in background pixels, 3 copies with CRC
Lossless copies only: TIFF or PNG with metadata stripped, re-wrapped or renamed
Read order on open: metadata record, then marker plus payload, then marker only (exact edge, OCR for text), then plain detection (case B).
Rules
Encode only in background pixels: outside the text mask grown by 4 px, and outside the hairline divider.
The encoding must be invisible: no visible pattern at 400% zoom, or after a +3 stop levels stretch on a flat white band. Pure white (255 or 65535) can only move down, so values are dithered one-sided.
Every save re-encodes both layers. An erase in place or a re-caption never leaves an old marker behind.
The payload holds only what is printed in the band plus layout. It never holds originalText, other metadata, or anything not already visible. A hidden copy of hidden data would be a privacy leak.
"Embed hidden band marker" is a setting, on by default. The save log records whether it was written, and File  "Remove hidden marker" saves a clean copy.
8-bit files with fewer than 256  64 px of usable background skip the marker and log why.
Limits. The marker will not survive printing and rescanning or heavy filters. The payload does not survive any lossy save or color conversion by another app. In those cases the app falls back to detection and OCR as before. This is a convenience layer, not a guarantee, and nothing depends on it.
Settings, storage and performance
All state is plain files in the OS app-data folder: %APPDATA%\Photoband on Windows and ~/Library/Application Support/Photoband on macOS. The app works fully offline and sends no data anywhere.
Path
Contents
settings.json
App settings, last-used template, last folder, window size
templates/*.json
User templates, one file each, safe to copy between machines
drafts/
Autosaved per-photo drafts, keyed by file path and source hash; deleted after a successful save
cache/
Preview proxies, LRU with a 2 GB cap (setting)
logs/
Save log and error log, rotated at 10 MB
Settings dialog tabs: General (display unit, theme, default template), Caption formats, Templates, Saving, Advanced (cache size, ExifTool path override, open logs folder, reset to defaults).
Performance targets (mid-range 2022 laptop, SSD)
Action
Target
App launch to usable window
< 3 s
Open 50 MP 8-bit TIFF, first preview
< 1.5 s
Open 600 MB 16-bit TIFF, first preview
< 5 s, with a progress indicator
Open any cached or prefetched photo
< 300 ms
Keystroke or style change to updated preview
< 50 ms
Save 50 MP TIFF, including verify
< 5 s, off the UI thread
Batch pre-flight, 200 photos
< 60 s, with the report filling in as it goes
Batch save, 100  50 MP TIFF
< 8 min, UI stays responsive
Other requirements
Every control is reachable by keyboard; shortcuts are listed in Help.
The UI follows OS light and dark mode, but the preview background is always neutral gray so band colors are judged correctly.
The UI is in English for v1. Captions support any Unicode text, including combining diacritics.
Long operations run in a worker process. The UI shows progress and never freezes.
Adversarial review
Every requested feature maps to a section above. The review also found 37 ways the naive design would fail; each is resolved in the spec. Three risks outside the app's control are deferred to v2 and listed at the end.
Requirement coverage
Requested
Covered in
Easy to run on Windows and Mac
Platform: installers, no Python needed
GUI; web-based is fine if fast
Platform (pywebview UI); performance targets
Manual caption per photo
Core workflow; non-goals exclude unattended batch
Edit TIFF files directly
File format support; Saving (TIFF in, TIFF out)
Prefill from title and caption
Metadata extraction: title, caption
Prefill names from face regions
Metadata extraction: MWG and MP regions, LR order, rows
Token formatting set up in a settings dialog
Token system: syntax, tokens, settings dialog
Free editing of the text in the editor
Token system: linked and custom blocks; Editor UI
Font, size and formatting options
Templates: text style table; inline bold and italic
Spacing options for text and layout
Templates: line height, letter spacing, space before and after, borders, padding
Standard templates, Polaroid white border with white bottom
Templates: Classic Polaroid and four others
Visual editor showing the exact render
Rendering engine: one layout for preview and output
Button to save over the original
Saving: Overwrite original, with backup
Button to save a copy, and where it goes
Saving: Save copy, destination settings, Save copy as
Recognize existing text on an image, erase it and replace it
Existing text: record check, band detection, OCR, rebuild or erase in place
Invisible marker in the caption area, so the band is recognized without metadata
Hidden band marker: robust marker and fragile payload
Batch mode: folder, template, batch settings, optional review, save all at once
Batch mode
Side-by-side before and after in single, batch and replacement views
Editor UI: Preview region
Failure modes found and how the spec handles them
Failure mode
Resolution
Section
Browser tab can't write to the original path or decode 16-bit TIFF
Local Python backend in a native webview window
Platform
Preview and output renderers disagree on line breaks
One layout object; output text drawn by the same engine
Rendering
Photo with EXIF rotation gets the band on its side
Rotate pixels upright first, write Orientation = 1
File formats
Adding a border shifts every face region
Remap region coordinates to the new canvas
Saving
Overwriting destroys the only uncaptioned copy
Backup on by default; photoband record allows crop-back
Saving
Re-captioning a saved file stacks a second band
Re-caption mode detects the record and replaces the band
Saving
Photo pixels get resampled or recompressed
Byte-for-byte copy into the canvas; hash check on verify
Rendering, Saving
White band looks off-white in Adobe RGB or ProPhoto files
Colors converted into the file's ICC profile
Rendering
Grayscale file with colored text
Converted to gray with a warning
File formats
Multi-page TIFF silently loses pages
Save blocked unless explicitly allowed
File formats
Empty field leaves a dangling label like "Taken in "
Optional [ ] groups; empty blocks take no space
Token system
Only a year or month is known
Partial dates format without the missing parts
Token system
Group photo in several rows reads as one confusing list
{names:rows} with row labels
Metadata, tokens
Names exist but without face positions
PersonInImage fallback; LR flagged unavailable
Metadata
Wrong LR order goes unnoticed
"Show faces" overlay with numbers
Editor UI
Template change wipes manual edits
Linked vs custom blocks
Token system
Long caption overflows the fixed Polaroid bottom
Warn, or shrink to fit with a 60% floor
Templates
Diacritics missing from the chosen font
Missing-glyph warning; bundled fonts cover Latin Extended, Greek, Cyrillic
Editor UI, Templates
Huge scans exceed WebView canvas limits
Proxy for preview; text layer drawn in strips
Rendering
Crash or accidental close loses edits
Autosaved drafts
Workflow, Storage
Copy name collides, or file locked by another app
Conflict policy; clear error with draft kept
Saving
Local server reachable by other processes
Loopback only, per-launch token, path allow-list
Platform
Metadata stripped, so the app can't tell its own band from the photo
Band detection plus OCR (case B)
Existing text
Detected photo edge is a few pixels off and crops the photo
Edge refined at full resolution; drag handles, nudge and loupe; confirmed before erasing
Existing text
OCR misreads a name
Low-confidence words underlined; text is always editable before save
Existing text
Erasing handwriting on a real print destroys part of the record
Overwrite disabled for case C by default; original text stored in the record; backup
Existing text
Flat fill leaves visible patches on textured paper
Inpainting on textured bands; brush to adjust the mask
Existing text
Text printed over the photo gets "erased" into the image
Detected and flagged only; never removed in v1
Existing text
Hidden marker becomes visible in flat white after a levels stretch
2 levels in DCT cells, one-sided dither at white, invisibility test at +3 stops
Hidden band marker
Stale marker describes an old caption after an edit elsewhere
Marker carries a photo-pixel hash; mismatch means treat as case B. Every save re-encodes
Hidden band marker
User strips metadata to share privately, but hidden pixels still carry data
Payload holds only what is visibly printed; setting to disable; Remove hidden marker command
Hidden band marker
Overwriting a whole folder by mistake
Confirmation with count and mode; backups on by default; Restore originals from this batch
Batch mode
One bad file aborts the whole run
Per-file isolation; failures listed with Retry failed
Batch mode
Unreviewed batch hides overflowing or wrong captions
Pre-flight report; photos with warnings held back by default; Review flagged only
Batch mode
A file changes on disk between pre-flight and save
Size and modified-time check before each write; skipped as changed
Batch mode
App closes mid-batch and progress is lost
Batch journal with resume on next launch
Batch mode
A toggle hides what changed; the user can't compare both at once
Permanent side-by-side panes with synced zoom and pan
Editor UI
Build phases and acceptance
The build runs in seven phases. Each ends with a gate that must pass before the next phase starts. Phase 1 goes first because it proves the riskiest part, a lossless 16-bit round trip with a matching preview.
Core pipeline. Backend decode, proxy and cache; ExifTool read; the layout engine; one hard-coded template; Save copy with verify. Gate: a 16-bit ProPhoto TIFF round-trips with the photo region bit-identical, and the band text in the output matches the preview's line breaks.
Metadata and tokens. All fields, face regions with LR and rows, the token parser with optional groups and partial dates, and the Caption formats settings tab. Gate: token unit tests pass on every fixture below.
Editor and templates. Side-by-side preview, inspector tabs, style and layout controls, the five built-ins, template management, linked and custom blocks, warnings, the faces overlay, undo. Gate: a new user captions 10 photos without help in under 5 minutes.
Complete saving. Overwrite with backup, all destination settings, region remap, the photoband record, re-caption (case A), drafts. Gate: regions line up on faces in Lightroom and digiKam after save; re-caption replaces the band cleanly.
Existing text. Band detection, OCR on both OSes plus Tesseract, the review banner and edge handles, Rebuild band and Erase in place with the mask brush, case C safety rules, and the hidden band marker (both layers). Gate: on the existing-text fixtures, the detected photo edge is within 2 px of the truth and every name is recoverable after user correction.
Batch mode. Batch settings panel, pre-flight report, review pass, parallel save queue, journal and resume, summary report, restore originals. Gate: a 200-file mixed folder runs to completion with planted failures isolated, and a killed run resumes without writing any file twice.
Packaging and performance. PyInstaller builds, Windows installer, signed and notarized macOS app, performance targets met. Gate: clean install on fresh Windows 11 and macOS machines with no Python installed.
Test fixtures
16-bit RGB TIFF with a ProPhoto ICC profile, LZW compressed.
8-bit grayscale TIFF, uncompressed.
JPEG with Orientation = 6 and MWG face regions.
TIFF with MWG regions written by Lightroom, and one with MP regions written by Windows Photo Gallery.
File with PersonInImage names only.
Group photo with three rows of named faces.
Multi-page TIFF, CMYK TIFF, and a 600 MB 16-bit scan.
Names with diacritics and one in Cyrillic.
File with only a partial date (1952).
A file captioned by this app, then with all metadata stripped (case B).
A photo captioned in another tool, with a colored band and a font this app does not have (case B).
A scanned real Polaroid with handwriting on the bottom border (case C).
A photo with a date stamp printed over the image (case D).
A photo whose own edge is near-white sky, which can fool band detection.
Acceptance checklist
Output photo region is pixel-identical to the source for TIFF and PNG
Output bit depth, channel count, compression, ICC profile and DPI match the source
Preview and output line breaks match at every zoom level
Face regions in the output land on the same faces as in the source
Rotated JPEG gets its band at the visual bottom
Editing a custom block survives a template switch
Overwrite with backup on leaves an untouched copy in _originals
Re-caption of a saved file restores the editor state and does not stack bands
A stripped-metadata file from this app is detected, its text read, and its band rebuilt without losing photo pixels
A handwritten Polaroid caption is read, erased on a copy with no visible patch at 100%, and kept as originalText
Text over the photo is flagged and never erased
Near-white sky at the photo edge is not mistaken for band
Killing the app mid-edit and relaunching restores the draft
Killing the app mid-save leaves the original file intact
All performance targets met on the reference laptop
Marker read back after a JPEG re-save at quality 70 and a 50% resize gives the exact photo edge
Payload read back from a metadata-stripped PNG restores the editor state exactly
No marker pattern visible at 400% zoom or after a +3 stop levels stretch
Batch output for a photo matches what single-photo mode produces with the same template and settings
Batch overwrite with backups can be fully reversed with Restore originals
Before and After panes stay in sync on zoom and pan in all three views
Decisions and later versions
All v1 questions are decided.
Decided
Question
Decision
Share the token parser with photokin
Yes, in v1: one small shared library (see Token system)
Write the rendered caption into XMP-dc:Description
No. The app never writes it; the setting is removed
Build the hidden band marker in v1
Yes, both layers, in phase 5
App name
Photoband
Fonts
12 bundled Google Fonts families plus Noto fallback; Browse Google Fonts and Add font file for more (see Templates)
WebView2 missing on Windows
Fall back to browser mode automatically; bundling the bootstrapper is v2
Later versions (v2)
Side panel showing the -back companion scan while typing, for transcribing handwriting.
Opt-in "Read with Claude" for handwriting OCR, sending only the band crop to the Claude API. v1 stays fully offline.
Inpainting option for text printed over the photo (case D). v1 stays flag-only.
Lightroom catalog integration: a hook through the Lightroom plugin so overwritten files refresh their previews and dimensions, and copies can be added to the catalog. v1 documents the manual "Read metadata from file" step.
Bundle a Perl runtime for ExifTool on macOS. v1 relies on the system Perl.
Bundle the WebView2 bootstrapper in the Windows installer.", "complete": true}, "frame": {"slug": "bdb7120c-63af-4404-9529-42e216247748", "url": "https://claude.ai/code/artifact/bdb7120c-63af-4404-9529-42e216247748", "artifactUrl": "https://claude.ai/code/artifact/bdb7120c-63af-4404-9529-42e216247748"}}